#Low birth weight is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as weight at birth less than 2500 g (5.5 lb). Low birth weight continues to be a significant public health problem globally and is associated with a range of both short- and long term consequences. Overall, it is estimated that 15% to 20% of all births worldwide are low birth weight, representing more than 20 million births a year.

The goal is to achieve a 30% reduction in the number of infants born with a weight lower than 2500 g by the year 2025. This would translate into a 3% relative reduction per year between 2012 and 2025 and a reduction from approximately 20 million to about 14 million infants with low weight at birth. 

low birth weight  also  increases  the  risk  for  noncommunicable  diseases  such  as  diabetes  and  cardiovascular  disease  later in life

Regional estimates of low birth weight include 28% in south Asia, 13% in sub-Saharan Africa and 9% in Latin America  

There are multiple causes of low birth weight, including early  induction  of  labour  or  caesarean  birth  (for  medical  or non-medical reasons), multiple pregnancies, infections and  chronic  conditions  such  as  diabetes  and  high  blood  pressure (5). The consequences of low birth weight include fetal and neonatal mortality and morbidity, poor cognitive development  and  an  increased  risk  of  chronic  diseases  later in life

calcium   supplementation  during  pregnancy  for  women  with  low  calcium  intake  has  been  identified  as  one  of  the  effective  nutritional  interventions  because  it  reduces  the  incidence  of  pre-eclampsia  and  may  also  reduce  the rate of preterm births

Interventions at country/regional level•  
Support for women’s empowerment and educational attainment•  
Social protection systems (e.g. cash-transfer programmes) for improving health-care visits•  
Food-distribution systems for subpopulations at risk of food insecurity•  
Improvement of clean and adequate water, sanitation and hygiene•   
Support  for  national  salt-iodization  programmes,  to  ensure  that  salt  consumed  by  households  is  adequately  iodized (for which there are new guidelines harmonizing iodine levels with reductions in salt consumption (26)•  
Improvement in facility-based perinatal care in regions with low coverage•  
Universal simplified perinatal data-collection system with electronic feedback systemsInterventions at community level•  
Adequate nutrition for adolescent girls•  
Promotion of smoking cessation during and after pregnancy•  
Community-based packages of care, to improve linkage and referral for facility births•  
Intermittent iron and folic acid supplements for women of reproductive age and adolescent girls, in settings where the prevalence of anaemia is 20% or higher•  
Prevention of malaria during pregnancyPre-pregnancy interventions•  
Birth spacing•  
Peri-conceptional daily folic acid supplementation for reduction of congenital anomalies•  
Promotion of smoking cessationAntenatal care interventions for all women•  
Fetal  growth  monitoring  and  neonatal  size  evaluation  at  all  levels  of  care,  integrated  into  the  WHO  new  antenatal care model (27)•  
Daily iron and folic acid supplements for women during pregnancy•  
Decrease in non-medically indicated caesarean delivery and induction•  
Promotion of smoking cessationAntenatal care interventions to selected women•  
Balanced protein–energy supplementation•  
Daily calcium supplementation for women in settings with low calcium intake•  
Uterine cervical cerclage (or cervical stitch) in women with previous preterm birth and short cervix•  Antiplatelet agents before 16 weeks for women at risk of pre-eclampsia•  
Progesterone therapy for women at risk of preterm birth•  
Antenatal single-dose corticosteroids for accelerating fetal lung maturity in women in early initiation of labour•  
Antibiotic treatment for women with bacterial vaginosis and asymptomatic bacteriuria•  Interventionist care in severe pre-eclampsia before term

https://www.centreforcities.org/reader/cities-outlook-2019/a-decade-of-austerity/

60% cut to council funding from 2009 -2015

https://www.rcm.org.uk/media/2448/state-of-maternity-services-report-2018-scotland.pdf

5% vacancy rates for midwives, 4X from 2013 to 2018

The majority (54 per cent) of Scottish babies born in 2017 were to women in their thirties and forties. Older women on average need more care and support during pregnancy and birth. This is because older women are more likely to have developed medical conditions that require higher levels of monitoring and care. They are also more likely to have multiple pregnancies and develop other pregnancy complications. Though this is not true for all older women, overall the changing profile of pregnant women is leading to an increased workload for midwives. Last

live singleton births = The birth of only one child during a single delivery with a gestation of 20 weeks or more.

SIMD data is based on 2020 figures, they might have changed over the 6 years

Where does urban/rural come from? What are the parameters?


* Project Brief is to have services match the aims of ensuring scotland is as 
healthy as it can be, our goal is to help you understand the causes of low birth 
weight and the detrimental effect this can have on later health and look to provide 
solutions that we believe can improve this problem.

* one of the key targets for the scottish government in terms of public health is 
A Scotland where we flourish in our early years 

* Low Birth weight is defined as baby born under 5.5lbs and has been linked to 
diabetes, cardiovascular disease and adhd. 

* uk average is 7% compared to Sweden 2.4%, Finland 4.1% and China 4.9% according 
to 2015 unicef data 

* In our work we are looking to uncover trends in the data and possible known 
correlations like poverty, age of mother, lifestyle of mother and access to ante 
natal care and midwifery support

* Some questions we look to ask - How strong is the correlation with poverty?
The % of long term midwifery vacancies in scotland has gone from 1.3% to 5.2% over 
the course of 4 years, does this have an effect?
Our data coincides with a period of austerity with average local authority cuts 
of 63% which affects smoking cessation groups, ante natal groups and midwifery support, 
does this have an effect?
The Scottish Govt has looked to centralise health care espeically in the highlands 
with the closure of several labour units, meaning often long trips to Inverness, 
is there a notable change becuase of this?
What are Sweden and Finland doing differently to Scotland?

Do any of the health boards show improvement and if so, why?



